# Secrets and ConfigMaps

## Module Objectives

1. Use Secrets and ConfigMaps to externalize application credentials and configuration

---

## **IMPORTANT SETUP**
Run the following to setup your environment

```shell
~/kubernetes-training/starting-points/start.sh configuration
```

## Use a Secret to Externalize Application Credentials and Configuration

One major problem with our current deployment is that we hardcoded the MySQL root password in the Pod configuration file. In most cases, we need to externalize secrets and configuration from the Kubernetes workload definition. We will use a secret to manage the MySQL administrator password.

1. Create a Secret with the MySQL administrator password.

    ```shell
    kubectl create secret generic mysql --from-literal=password=root
    ```

1. Expose the `mysql` Secret as an environment variable in the `db` Pod. Modify the `env` section in the `db.yaml` to look like the following.

    ```yaml
    env:
    - name: MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: mysql
          key: password
    ```

    Here we are telling Kubernetes to get the value for the `MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD` variable from the `mysql` Secret. Each Secret can have multiple key-value pairs, in our case we get the value from the `password` key.

1. Add exactly the same `env` section to the `backend.yaml`.

1. Modify the startup command in the `backend.yaml` file.

    ```yaml
    command: ["sh", "-c", "app -mode=backend -run-migrations -port=8080 -db-host=db -db-password=$MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD" ]
    ```

    As you can see, here we call `sh` instead of calling our app directly. The shell is required to do environment variable substitution for us. Also we use `$MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD` instead of a hardcoded password.

1. Delete and recreate the `backend` and `db` pods. The database Pod should be redeployed before the `backend` pod, because the backend attempts to create a required empty database only on startup,
but if the *db* pod isn't running, then the required database will not be created.
As a result, you should give the `db` some time to start and become
ready (a minute or so) before starting the `backend` pod.

    > Note: You will not be able to use `kubectl apply` command this time. Instead, you should use `kubectl delete` first and then redeploy pod.

1. Bring up a browser and reload the web page to the frontend to make sure that the app is still working fine.
Use `kubectl get service` to get the public IP address of the frontend.
---

## **IMPORTANT CLEANUP**
Run the following to cleanup your environment

```shell
~/kubernetes-training/starting-points/cleanup.sh configuration
```
