# Stackdriver

## Objectives
- View application logs with `kubectl`
- View container logs and metrics

---

## **IMPORTANT SETUP**
Run the following to setup your environment

```shell
~/kubernetes-training/starting-points/start.sh logs
```

---

## View Application Logs with Kubectl

Lets view logs from one of the backend pods

1. Identify the pod name

  ```
  kubectl get pods | grep backend
  ```

  Output:
  ```
  backend-86b957c9c8-f7l7p                         1/1     Running   0          25h
  backend-76fcd5f658-hp482                         1/1     Running   0          25h
  backend-7f96c9c6c8-wpq2q                         1/1     Running   0          25h
  ```

1. Pick a pod and lets use the pod name to get the logs.

  ```
  kubectl logs backend-86b957c9c8-f7l7p | less
  ```

  Although the logs may not be very full here, it's a good idea to pipe the output to `less`, making it easy to scroll through. You can also use tools like `grep` to find specific phrases in the file.

  If you wanted to watch log entries as they come in you can use the `-f` flag to follow the logs.  This is similar to `tail -f`.

  Example:

  ```
  kubectl logs backend-86b957c9c8-f7l7p -f
  ```

## View container logs and metrics

Getting information from `kubectl` is useful, but sometimes we need a higher, more encompassing view with searching and drill-down capabilities.

When we deployed this cluster, we provided the flag `--enable-stackdriver-kubernetes` so that the Stackdriver Kubernetes integrations feature is available. If we had not enabled this we can still use the standard Stackdriver app and get nearly the same information, however the Stackdriver Kubernetes Integrations make viewing this data much easier and more intuitive.

1. visit https://app.google.stackdriver.com/kubernetes

Here we have three views. Explore all three
- Infrastructure
- Workloads
- Services

What is the difference between all of them?

1. Find the sample app. Workloads -> k8s-training-> default -> backend -> (pick a backend pod) -> backend (the container)

What metrics does it show about this app?

1. Click on "Logs" (between "Metrics" and "Details")

1. Scroll down

1. Click "GO TO LOGGING"

This brings up the traditional Stackdriver logging window where we can create custom metrics.

Notice that there are a lot more fields in the query.

Broken out (and removing the logic), it looks like this:

    ```
    resource.labels.cluster_name="k8s-training"
    resource.labels.container_name="backend"
    resource.labels.location="us-west2-b"
    resource.labels.namespace_name="default"
    resource.labels.pod_name="backend-v2-695455589f-7nfcz"
    resource.labels.project_id="barry-williams"
    resource.type="k8s_container"
    severity >= DEFAULT
    ```

How can we modify this filter to pull logs from all backends?

<details><summary>SOLUTION - CLICK ME</summary>
<p>

Remove the filter specifying the name of the pod:

```
resource.labels.pod_name="backend-v2-695455589f-7nfcz"
```

</p>
</details>

Can we modify this to bring back the logs for the frontend?

<details><summary>SOLUTION - CLICK ME</summary>
<p>

Change this filter:

```
resource.labels.container_name="frontend"
```

</p>
</details>

Can we filter this to show log lines that contain the word "operating"?

<details><summary>SOLUTION - CLICK ME</summary>
<p>

```
AND textPayload:"Operating"
```

</p>
</details>

---

## **IMPORTANT CLEANUP**
Run the following to cleanup your environment

```shell
~/kubernetes-training/starting-points/cleanup.sh logs
```
