## Kubelet

The kubelet is the primary “node agent” that runs on each node.

The kubelet takes a set of PodSpecs that are provided through various mechanisms (primarily through the apiserver) and ensures  the containers described in those PodSpecs are running and healthy.

## VM SSH Information

This lab will involve SSH into a VM. There are two ways to start the SSH session:

1. SSH using the GCP Console.

  1. Click the Menu (top left, looks like three lines)
  1. Scroll to "Compute Engine"
  1. Click VM Instances. You will be shown a list of VMs
  1. Click the SSH button next to the instance you wish to connect to

    This should open up a new browser tab with the SSH connection. To exit the session type `exit` or close the browser tab

1. SSH from Cloud Shell using the `gcloud` cli

  1. Run `gcloud compute instances list` to get a list of VMs in your project
  1. Run `gcloud compute ssh <instance name>` to SSH into that VM
    > Note: you may be prompted to enter or setup an ssh key passphrase

  To exit the session type `exit`

**Important!** Please be aware of what session you are using. Running commands intended for Cloud Shell in the VM may not work, and vice versa. The best way to tell is the look of the command prompt:
- Cloud Shell:

  `gcptraining1@cloudshell:~ (gcptraining1-217396)$`

- VM SSH:

  `gcptraining1@gke-k8s-training-default-pool-50fd4bfa-5bks ~ $`


### Exercise 1: Investigate kubelet

1. SSH into any worker node

1. Check the kubelet service status
    ```
    systemctl status kubelet
    ```
    The status should be `active(running)`.

1. Check the kubelet startup parameters

    Save output of the previous commend to a file.
    ```
    systemctl status kubelet > /tmp/kubelet-params
    ```
    Open `/tmp/kubelet-params` and check statup parameters. A few important parameters are copied here.

    * `--cluster-dns=100.64.0.10` - DNS server used for all pods, point to Kube DNS system pod.
    * `--kubeconfig=/var/lib/kubelet/kubeconfig` - kubeconfig is used to connecto to kube API
    * `--network-plugin=kubenet` - use [kubenet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/#kubenet) network plugin
    * `--pod-manifest-path=/etc/kubernetes/manifests` - the folder where all static pods are located.

1. Check the kubelet logs
    ```
    sudo journalctl -u kubelet
    ```
    You don't need to understand everything from here, just remember how to access these logs for troubleshooting.

### Exercise 2 (Optional): Run a static pod

1. Put your own pod manifest into `--pod-manifest-path` folder. (The folder should be watched every 20s, so no need to restart kubelet)
1. Check whether kubernetes will run your pod.

### Cleanup

1. Run `exit` to exit the SSH session
