## Scheduler

## VM SSH Information

This lab will involve SSH into a VM. There are two ways to start the SSH session:

1. SSH using the GCP Console.

  1. Click the Menu (top left, looks like three lines)
  1. Scroll to "Compute Engine"
  1. Click VM Instances. You will be shown a list of VMs
  1. Click the SSH button next to the instance you wish to connect to

    This should open up a new browser tab with the SSH connection. To exit the session type `exit` or close the browser tab

1. SSH from Cloud Shell using the `gcloud` cli

  1. Run `gcloud compute instances list` to get a list of VMs in your project
  1. Run `gcloud compute ssh <instance name>` to SSH into that VM
    > Note: you may be prompted to enter or setup an ssh key passphrase

  To exit the session type `exit`

**Important!** Please be aware of what session you are using. Running commands intended for Cloud Shell in the VM may not work, and vice versa. The best way to tell is the look of the command prompt:
- Cloud Shell:

  `gcptraining1@cloudshell:~ (gcptraining1-217396)$`

- VM SSH:

  `gcptraining1@gke-k8s-training-default-pool-50fd4bfa-5bks ~ $`

### Exercise 1:  Disabling the scheduler

1. SSH to the master node. For this lab we will do all things from the master, including using `kubectl`

1. Move the kube-scheduler manifest out of the `/etc/kubernetes/manifests/` folder.
    ```
    sudo mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-scheduler.manifest ~
    ```
1. Wait until the kubelet shuts down the scheduler pod. This can be checked by listing all system pods.
    ```
    kubectl --namespace kube-system get pods
    ```

1. Deploy a pod normally.

1. Use the `kubectl get pods` command to list all pods. The one you've just deployed should be in a pending state with no node assigned to it.

1. Use the `kubectl describe pod` command and check the "Node" value to verify the pod has not been assigned to a node.

### Exercise 2: Manually schedule a pod

1. While the default scheduler is disabled and a pod in the Pending state, try to manually assign a node to the container using API.
    * In a separate command window, run `kubectl get pods -w` to start watching pods being created
    * Use curl to sent a POST request to the `/api/v1/namespaces/{namespace}/bindings` endpoint.
    * The body of the request should have the following format `{"apiVersion":"v1", "kind": "Binding", "metadata": {"name": "<pod-name>"}, "target": {"apiVersion": "v1", "kind": "Node", "name": "<node-name>"}}`
    * Use the official [Reference documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/) and correct version of the [API Reference](https://v1-9.docs.kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.9/#binding-v1-core) to help.  
    ```
    curl -X POST 127.0.0.1:8080/api/v1/namespaces/default/bindings -H "Content-Type:application/json" -d '{"apiVersion":"v1", "kind": "Binding", "metadata": {"name": "twocontainers"}, "target": {"apiVersion": "v1", "kind": "Node", "name": "master-us-west1-c-4lmf"}}'
    ```

### Cleanup

1. **Ensure you copy/move the kube-scheduler manifest back into** `/etc/kubernetes/manifests/`

  ```
  sudo mv ~/kube-scheduler.manifest /etc/kubernetes/manifests/
  ```

1. Run `exit` and to end the SSH session
